Progress report December 2023 (#386)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-dec-2023/index.md

  >}}

This new section can be accessed by hold pressing a game in the list, and gives access to these new pages:

- A game information page to check program ID, game developer, game version running, and game ROM path.

{{< imgs
	"./config2.png| Great for diagnosing update installation shenanigans"
  >}}

- Per-game settings page, with the option to revert a setting to the global default.

{{< imgs
	"./config3.png|As a game tester, and an 8GB sufferer, your writer considers this a huge blessing"
  >}}

- Similarly, a per-game driver selector, for the cases where Qualcomm did something correctly, or an older Turnip release is better.
- An add-ons manager to install, enable, and disable updates, DLCs, and mods. While there are plans to support compressed mods, right now they must be uncompressed and manually selected here.

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Bet you enjoy this one the most"
    "./config4.png"
    "./config5.png"
    >}}

- A save data manager, allowing to export or import per game saves, along the global option.
- An option to delete all save data of that particular game.
- An option to clear the pipeline cache of that particular game.

> - And a Start button, which allows you to select global or custom configuration. Launching from the game list will always load the custom configuration.

Reviewer: "which allows you to select **a** global or custom configuration" ?

This is already well-supported when using host-mapped addressing (most commonly known as fastmem) on Linux-based operating systems, as it only requires a few calls to map the physical memory blocks which comprise the heap.

Games based on Unreal Engine 4 do not do this.
Instead of reserving all of the available memory heap immediately, they reserve small blocks from the kernel on demand.
If only the software page table is being used, there’s no problem, as the blocks aren’t resulting in calls to `mmap`.

When yuzu uses host-mapped addressing, the emulator propagates all of these mappings into the host address space.
That in itself wouldn’t normally be a problem, if it wasn’t for the fact that Unreal Engine 4 can allocate hundreds of thousands of small heap blocks, going over the kernel limit with ease, and crashing the entire program.

yuzu is not the only [project](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/vm-max-map-count.html) affected by this completely arbitrary limitation–it has been a complaint for quite a long time.

> To work around this limitation, byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "12466" "inserts a layer" >}} between the software page table and the host mapping system, constantly tracking the heap allocations made by programs and automatically recycling some less recently used mappings, which causes some stuttering―but better than a game crash. Collection will reduce the number of mappings to around half of the 65530 limit most systems ship with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To work around this limitation, byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "12466" "inserts a layer" >}} between the software page table and the host mapping system, constantly tracking the heap allocations made by programs and automatically recycling some less recently used mappings, which causes some stuttering―but is better than a game crash. Collection will reduce the number of mappings to around half of the 65530 limit most systems ship with.
```

But not only german77 worked on input this month, newcomer [HurricanePootis](https://github.com/HurricanePootis) brought us an interesting fix for Linux users.
Linux handles hardware permissions on a per-user level.
For example, if for some reason the administrator desires it, an user can be completely blocked from having access to the `video` group, or `audio`, etc.

Connected devices are often only able to be accessed by the `root` user or group. While this usually isn’t a problem for just using the device, it can block access to the custom Joy-Con and Pro Controller drivers german77 implemented, regardless of whether the user runs an appimage or Flatpak yuzu build.
By {{< gh-hovercard "12292" "adding a udev rule" >}} to grant access to `hidraw` devices, HurricanePootis circumvented this limitation.
Thank you!

## Miscellaneous changes

### Multiprocess preliminary work

We spoke about preliminary work for multiprocess support. There’s more to cover on the matter.

> byte[] refactored how yuzu emulates {{< gh-hovercard "12236" "CPU core activation," >}} he assures us writing three thousand lines of code simplifies the design of the ARM interface the emulator uses.

Reviewer: I do not understand this sentence

This constant, per-frame swapchain recreation is not that expensive on NVIDIA and Mesa drivers, but anything else (Intel, AMD, Android drivers) can spend as much as 30ms processing this switching.
That’s around 30 FPS lost in a game supposed to render at 60!

How do we avoid this? Well, Vulkan always interprets any framebuffer currently being presented to screen as sRGB, so replacing the frame with a non-sRGB one is just adding unnecessary additional work and pissing off several drivers.
Changing the logic to {{< gh-hovercard "12274" "ignore sRGB in framebuffer images" >}} provides smooth frametimes for users of these drivers.

{{< imgs
	"./sm3d.png|What does Mario do with that many stars? Not sing Peaches I hope (Super Mario 3D All-Stars)"
  >}}

On a related note, let’s talk about presentation limits and how they affect asynchronous presentation, which moves presenting to the screen to a different CPU thread.

Due to several factors, yuzu’s Vulkan renderer could only process up to 6 frames at a time.

> While this isn’t normally an issue on desktop, especially for users that don’t enable Asynchronous Presentation (available in `Emulation > Configure… > Graphics > Advanced`), Android, a platform that demands always using asynchronous presentation, showed us that low enough performance with the setting toggled on, regardless of OS or platform, can cause the queue of swapchain images to grow beyond the limit of 6 frames. Leading to a driver crash and your progress being lost. Ouch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this isn’t normally an issue on desktop, especially for users that don’t enable Asynchronous Presentation (available in `Emulation > Configure… > Graphics > Advanced`), Android, a platform that demands always using asynchronous presentation, showed us that low enough performance with the setting toggled on, regardless of OS or platform, can cause the queue of swapchain images to grow beyond the limit of 6 frames. Thus, leading to a driver crash and your progress being lost. Ouch.
```

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"A new tournament begins (THE KING OF FIGHTERS XIII GLOBAL MATCH)"
	"./kofbug.png"
	"./koffix.png"
>}}

{{< gh-hovercard "12479" "Fixing the buffer row length," >}} and, while at it, tuning the software BCn decoder Mali needs (Mali moment #2), is how [GPUCode](https://github.com/GPUCode) fixed the rendering of `THE KING OF FIGHTERS XIII GLOBAL MATCH` and the Eatsa Pizza minigame from `Mario Party Superstars`.

{{< imgs
	"./pizza.png|Your writer is old enough to remember playing this on the Nintendo 64 (Mario Party Superstars)"
  >}}

That ends the Vulkan section, so what’s left is to follow up with the:

{{< imgs
	"./opengl.png|And you can’t prove Khronos wrong"
  >}}

### OpenGL

Because [epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) won’t let the old API rest.

One remaining issue (of many) for the OG open API was a bug with the shadows of `Metroid Prime Remastered`.
By bringing the {{< gh-hovercard "12412" "counter query accuracy," >}} which was first seen in Vulkan, to OpenGL, this issue is now solved.

{{< imgs
	"./metroid.png|SPAAAAACE (Metroid Prime Remastered)"
  >}}

> Another win for OpenGL users is two fixes for `Xenoblade Chronicles 3`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenGL users saw another win with the implementation of two fixes for `Xenoblade Chronicles 3`.
```

Yep, 64k is not enough for everyone.

This way, Unreal Engine games can be safely played on Linux-based systems, like desktop distributions and Android devices, without needing to disable fastmem and NCE, two big performance settings that no one wants to keep off.

## Project Leviathan, applets, and input fun

As usual, [german77](https://github.com/german77) has been having his good share of fun working on input and the native applets.

First in the list is a solution for Amiibos with read-only permissions. If a program mounted them as read-only, yuzu doesn’t access any of their encrypted data, and could mark them as corrupt, which wasn’t really the case.
Since read-only data is set from the factory, {{< gh-hovercard "12255" "skipping the corruption check" >}} allows the use of read-only mounts in games like `The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom`.

Next up, an announcement. german77 started working on a rewrite for the HID (human interface devices) code, called `Project Leviathan` with the intention of further improving the accuracy of yuzu’s input emulation.
So far only preliminary work has been done, but some results have already been put into service.

> The first part finished is the {{< gh-hovercard "12289" "emulation" >}} of `AppletResource`, which allows the developers to start working on multiprocess support in the near future, as well as other necessary resources like `AppletResourceUserId`, or simply aruid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first part finished is the {{< gh-hovercard "12289" "emulation" >}} of `AppletResource`, which allows the developers to start working on multiprocess support in the near future, as well as other necessary resources like `AppletResourceUserId`, or simply `aruid`.
```

It generated around 13 instances of itself, which lead to multiple, hard to explain bugs related to user data, including the sudden loss of profile after emulator crashes.
Slapping the profile manager and telling it to run a single instance should mitigate most random profile loss issues.

Sometimes, games have unexpected file organisation strategies.
A recent episode of this phenomenon affects the `Batman: Arkham` trilogy: the base games ship with a null RomFS.
That shouldn't have been a problem; having a RomFS is never a requirement to run a program. 
`Batman: Arkham Asylum` did have a RomFS, and was launching fine, but `Batman: Arkham City` and `Batman: Arkham Knight` require their updates installed to be playable (their base game size is only 8MB).
The update contains the RomFS, but since the base game didn't contain it, yuzu couldn't find the RomFS to load, even with the update installed.

Handling this {{< gh-hovercard "12263" "peculiar case" >}} fell into byte[]’s hands, and the World’s Greatest Detective can now go fetch ? signs all over the place at ease.

{{< imgs

> 	"./batman.png|The Goddamn Batman (Batman: Arkham Knight)"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	"./batman.png|The Batman (Batman: Arkham Knight)"
```

  >}}

Another {{< gh-hovercard "12392" "file system implementation" >}} byte[] gave us was support for the `OpenDirectoryMode` flag, which allows `Portal 2` to save and load properly. One has to wonder why this wasn’t fixed earlier.

{{< imgs
	"./portal21.png|Are we going to space? (Portal 2)"
  >}}

Some additional work was needed to get this masterpiece fully playable. 

> An entire service needed some patching-up, specifically, `ro`, or {{< gh-hovercard "12321" "relocatable object" >}} (allowing programs to load libraries on the fly), needed to be rewritten a bit–just over a thousand lines of code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An entire service needed some patching-up, specifically, `ro`, or {{< gh-hovercard "12321" "relocatable object" >}} (allowing programs to load libraries on the fly), needed to be rewritten a bit  — just over a thousand lines of code.
```

  >}}

A silly issue byte[] made in the [SSL](https://www.openssl.org/) buffer size configuration broke the Open Course World section of `SUPER MARIO MAKER 2`.
{{< gh-hovercard "12372" "Fixing this configuration mishap" >}} allows the game to run its "main mode".

Yet another set of findings by byte[], yet another battle won against shutdown crashes.
This time we have timing related crashes in {{< gh-hovercard "12454" "core timing" >}} being addressed, and a rather rare {{< gh-hovercard "12455" "shutdown crash" >}} in the kernel being squashed.

Let’s close this longer-than-expected report and move to the hardware section.
Our last section in the list is:

### UI changes

german77 spotted an oopsie in the UI configuration files, leading to the language selection never getting saved.
If anyone noticed yuzu always selected the default language, you now know what the reason was.
{{< gh-hovercard "12402" "Making this value persistent" >}} solved the problem.

And lastly one last minor buff to Linux desktop users, from the hands of newcomer [ReillyBrogan](https://github.com/ReillyBrogan).

When using a Wayland compositor, program windows are matched to their `.desktop` shortcut file.

> The appId window property is intended to match the name of the `.desktop` file, for example, `org.yuzu_emu.yuzu.desktop`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `appId` window property is intended to match the name of the `.desktop` file, for example, `org.yuzu_emu.yuzu.desktop`.
```

> Plasma desktop by default sets this property to the name of the binary file, which in this case is just `yuzu`, and doesn’t match the expected value of `org.yuzu_emu.yuzu`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plasma desktop, by default, sets this property to the name of the binary file, which in this case is just `yuzu`, and doesn’t match the expected value of `org.yuzu_emu.yuzu`.
```

This led to Plasma desktop users (Steam Deck included) displaying yuzu without our glorious icon.
One {{< gh-hovercard "12521" "manual override" >}} later, and the icon is properly there. Thank you!

## Hardware section

> Not much to mention this time, but there’s a few nits that deserve to be brought up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## NVIDIA, safe to update

### Proprietary NVIDIA driver

As previously mentioned, it’s safe to update to the latest driver versions thanks to the fixes implemented by byte[].
This will become more critical once the SUPER refresh of Ada cards is out, so perfect timing there.
Hopefully they finally provide good value.

### NVK

> What’s this? A free and open source Mesa Vulkan driver for Turing and later NVIDIA hardware, that’s what it is!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What’s this? A free and open source Mesa Vulkan driver for Turing and later NVIDIA hardware?
```

[It’s still very early days](https://www.phoronix.com/news/Mesa-23.3-Released), Mesa just started shipping preliminary support for this new driver, but we can’t wait to try it out once it’s mature enough.
There’s nothing better than having the option to choose.

## AMD

We identified `Pokémon Scarlet & Violet` crashes on RDNA1 hardware exclusively (RX 5000 series).
The usual standard procedure was followed, a custom test case was provided in a bug report.

## Intel…

> In contrast, Intel failed us again. 
> No words from the fix for the geometry shader crash we [reported](https://github.com/IGCIT/Intel-GPU-Community-Issue-Tracker-IGCIT/issues/551) back in October yet.
> 
> We hope it’s just a delay from the holidays.
> 2024 is the year of ~~the Linux desktop~~ working Intel Windows drivers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In contrast, Intel failed us again. 
No word on the fix for the geometry shader crash we [reported](https://github.com/IGCIT/Intel-GPU-Community-Issue-Tracker-IGCIT/issues/551) back in October yet.

We hope it’s just a delay from the holidays.
2024 is the year of ~~the Linux desktop~~ working Intel Windows drivers.
```

## Qualcomm

> This section needs to be split too. Just a moment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Proprietary Qualcomm driver

> Much better.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Even Turnip, with its [early support](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/v24.0.0_R15) already shows outstanding results, here is an Adreno 740 vs an Adreno 750:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even Turnip, with its [early support](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/v24.0.0_R15) already shows outstanding results. Here is an Adreno 740 vs an Adreno 750:
```

{{< single-title-imgs-compare

> 	"i9 14900K who? (The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild)"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	"i9-14900K who? (The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild)"
```

> In simpler terms, Balanced mode in the Red Magic 9 is faster than Diablo mode in the previous Red Magic 8.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In short, Balanced mode in the Red Magic 9 is faster than Diablo mode in the previous Red Magic 8.
```

We can’t wait for Mesa to add Turnip support to this new hardware in town, but as anyone with experience using Mesa will tell you: "let them cook".

Speaking of which.

### Turnip

Adreno 750 aside, which Mesa [already has in the oven](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/26934), the Turnip network of support continues to improve.

> Current [releases](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases) for example have added support for rare GPU variants, like Adreno 642L and Adreno 644.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Current [releases](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases) have added support for rare GPU variants, like Adreno 642L and Adreno 644.
```

> Performance has improved too, as well as stability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Performance and stability have improved as well.
```

> Keep up to date with Turnip releases; they usually only bring benefits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keep up to date with Turnip releases; they usually only bring improvements.
```

## Mali moment

Total Mali moments count this month: 3.

But it’s not all bad news dear Mali sufferers!

[Newer generations](https://www.phoronix.com/news/Panthor-DRM-Newer-Mali) of Mali hardware, codenamed "Panthor" will have an officially backed Mesa driver, the already existing but almost abandoned [Panfrost/PanVK](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/26358) driver.

> This means that Mail moments may cease existing sometime in the future, in a similar way to how Turnip provides a much better experience to Adreno users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that Mali moments may cease existing sometime in the future, in a similar way to how Turnip provides a much better experience to Adreno users.
```

> This means in the future Mali moments will maybe stop existing, in a similar way to how Turnip provides a much better experience to Adreno users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that Mail moments may cease existing sometime in the future, in a similar way to how Turnip provides a much better experience to Adreno users.
```

## Future projects

Multiprocess [GPU SMMU](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/12579) support is almost done now, thanks to Blinkhawk.
We’ll cover it in more detail next month, but you can check the pull request draft meanwhile to see the expected benefits it brings.

And maybe the rest of the team has something more going on, yeah. But let’s save that surprise for later, it’s more fun that way (this in no way means any attempt to leak a picture of the current progress was rejected by all devs, no no).

> That’s all folks! I’m finishing writing and collecting media at 7AM. Thank you for reading until the end, let’s see you all again next time in the first progress report of 2024!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That’s all folks! Thank you for reading until the end, we hope to see you all again in the first progress report of 2024!
```
